One of the key things about dashboards is that we do have some various different export options and we have over the years introduced options, when you're exporting to have it. It basically ignore the layout a little bit and that it will shift things to expand components that have scrolling. But fundamentally it's not the same as fitting it to a printer page size. And so it was that desire to fit it to a printer page says that really introduce the concept of a print layout. This customer example, here is a very simplistic example that they were using for Taking a table within a dashboard. So the table itself, you can see, overall from a size perspective. It has quite a few detail rows in this table, right? So they're scrolling within the component. If you were to export it under Normal, export options by default, it would cut it off the first X-Men rows to here. Or if you did expand component, it would just make the page extremely tall.
Right, it would just go and go and go. It wouldn't be a normal printer page size, but the introduction of the print layout is then a design choice that the user is making where they actually are creating a completely independent layout. From the Dashboard layout. So you actually can selectively not include all components. And then you're also looking to have them fit within a printer page size. And this will translate to the Export option. So when a report Type print layout is created for this dashboard. There was a specific printer page size selected based off of the dashboard design itself to fit the width of the contents and so on.
But it will now continue on to next page. So that's the fundamental concept behind it was to get that concept of being able to physically print it off. However,
Has slowly been enhanced over the years to come closer to our reporting, but it's still not going to have The concept of grouping elements and then repeating them for different filtering situations. It is just transposing a combination of elements into a printer page layout. So if I were to take One of our example dashboards. that's about that. Won't get logged out again. Alright, let's try this again, going here.
: The fundamentals of the print layout is that it is in the same general page section. Under JOSH Board Options for Layout in general, which includes options for the scale to screen for setting up a target screen for the original dashboard design. And also for alternate device layouts as well. So that option for enabling having a print layout available is something that you would do. On this seam view sheet, option settings. When you go into the Create edit, you're going to be setting this up very similar to the general. page properties that you would set when creating say a report it's going to
Respect whatever printer page size, you've set it to the portrait versus landscape. So you want to fundamentally think about your dashboard from Are your components very wide in terms of their design because the horizontal scrolling isn't something that really transposes well to a printer layout situation. So you want to think of everything in terms of vertical expansion, works great. You just Roll to Next page but you want to design your printer layout. With the idea of what is the max width from what nders. with my table, what looks good with my tables and my charts. For thinking out whether you don't want portrait versus landscape.
You're going to be setting up header and footer margins as well. So you actually can introduce header and footer content. We allow for just a couple of additional types of elements where you can put text or images and that text. We have the mechanics in there for page number date, time stamp that we had always supported in our traditional reporting. So this way you don't have to have that type of component in the dashboard itself, it's just there for the print layout. However the rest of what is in the print layout, in terms of the body content of this print layout is going to be based off of your dashboard.
So if we say, Hey, this margin and the header and footer within the margin size, what it's going to be works for us. You click ok, and you click. You'll now have the toggle not just for say a mobile layout that might have already existed for this. But you will also get the toggle option for the print layout. and I don't know why this is getting slightly cut off here, but it might just be my session was a little bit slow. The print layout is going to visually show up guidelines as a pixel for the grid and the components for your dashboard are going to show up. Just like, you are used to when you were dealing with the mobile layout. And therefore it also has the same. caveat that you were dealing with the mobile layout in that
they inherit the names that they had. From the dashboard. So, Actually having taken the time to rename a table. So it's not crossed at one. Cross Tab 2, Step 3 Chart 1 Chart. 2 Chart, 3 can be helpful in this situation. With this, when you're in the main body you can see that you're going to get some different listings of components that are going to be.
Components from the Dashboard, You have the option to force a page break in your design. So that way you can say, after this chart, make sure you force to stop start of next page, because this is kind of like a loose cut off, because of the concept of tables will expand over many pages, but you wouldn't see that really in the design portion, so you can introduce a page break at the bottom of say, a table. So that a chart or next component, we'll start at the top of the following page for however, tall that table expands to be when you're actually dealing with real data. You'll notice that the Edit content will allow me to jump into my header. my footer. That would be at the bottom. And it basically just gives me a little header section and when I'm in the header or the footer section, my toolbox, no longer has the print
Page break it. Instead, has text and image as I mentioned before. So if you want to add an image, you add the image, you go ahead and you position it where you want it within this header section, you're still going to have certain general options for snapping to grid and so on and then when you go into the properties it's going to behave just like an image. Does on a dashboard where you're either pulling from images that were already uploaded into this dashboard or you would explicitly go and find say a logo that you wanted to have available for that. So you can do that process when you are introducing a text component, the text component can be a positioned and many times you would remove snap to grid. So you're getting more of that free throwing perfect layout that you're going to get with the reporting but it can work as a title.
You can actually introduce the concept of a title that's going to be repeated at the top of each page. But you could also use our notations that we support. So key is Page number.
And is going to be total number of pages. You're going to have the option for d for the date and then you put in ting, you can do t for timestamp of when it was run and do formatting on that. Afterwards with the comma. So that notations, you're going to want to probably reference in the documentation the nuances that exist for those and that you could have them in the header or the footer for when you're approaching your example.
visually it is going to be drag and drop. You are going to get content, but you also need to think fundamentally. How was your dashboard designed? Because the rectangles And the concept of them being. An outline of color.
Is not really going to translate. With this the same. So you're going to have these rectangles, you would need to Be very careful with how you're adding them. Are they the correct rectangle to go behind other things? And you'll also want to do some experimentation because there might actually be some nuances with the way the rectangles are. So if you remember with the construction, if you were to actually run the construction dashboard, some of these charts are a little. What am I doing?
With white or colored rectangle behind. so you want to think about how you're going to approach that when you pull out your chart, And was your chart? I believe that the reason why this one is not right now. Is because you guys have put the background there for mobile layout. So you didn't have to worry about aligning, the rectangles behind the charts in the mobile layout, but if someone has not done that, you're going to run into an issue. if you have the white font you're not going to have that colored background on the page that you get with the dashboard. So this is about thinking out. How would it fit?
within your setup and your configuration, it will allow me to resize these components within the scaling of the printer page size. And one of the key things is that, as I said, this is a loose cut off for where the page starts next. So if you want to make sure that you force it to page break and then put this at the top of the next page. You want to introduce a page break So, if I have this kind of rent layout, And I'm just going to save this.
so, I'm not messing with the example on this environment, because this example, on this environment, Does not get. Ref Very often in terms of a rollback. So if I were to export this to PDF right now, I'm going to get. My printer page. You'll notice that because I stretched this one. It does kind of line them up. You can see that the border padding of the one-inch margin. Is kind of doubled down with the fact that I didn't, but up against the edge here, the edge of this is the edge of the print From my printer page layout not the physical page boundary so the left and right margins that are built into that print layout are outside of the boundary of these DASH guidelines here. So if I wanted this to be edge to edge, I actually can go ahead and do that. And you can still use the Arrange options that you get here to align things really nice.
And then, what you're going to see is that your table will expand. And if I happen to have just more to this table, It would roll onto the next page. In terms of the behavior, this table just doesn't happen to be very long but your table if you had a Table in a dashboard that had a hundred thousand rows on it. You're going to get page of table detail. And it's just gonna page break For them. So this print layout really is taking a free floating dashboard design layout, and allowing you to selectively include components. Just with mobile layout, And you can scale components. in a certain fashion, but you're not going to
Be getting. the Exact Preview, When you're in design, you're still going to have the table, you can give it it's minimum size, but you're not going to get a table's max size when doing your design, it will expand based off of content. So that's something that you need to keep in mind when you're approaching this print layout from a fundamentals perspective and we introduce this page break option because if I was trying to have this butt up against the top or if I wasn't very careful with it or if I had another table so that table just pushed me to the middle of the page, all of a sudden this is not starting at the top of the page, just because there's this phantom dash line because there was a table above it pushing it. So by putting this page break, it actually allows you to say No in between this and this start Start at Top of Next page.
From a design perspective, but it is a little imprecise, you're just not getting quite the same control that you would get in style studio with the advanced reporting. But from a majority of print needs, For dashboard clients. This is great, right? You're gonna get the not one giant page, that's 30 inches tall, which you would get originally without a print layout with a table, it has a lot of details and it's just like, you do Expand content Don't cut off table and it just makes the super tall, you can't physically print that. it's outside of a printer page's boundaries. So this at least will keep it within whatever printer page boundaries, you want to work within and allow you to build in various things with your layout. So if I were to build this Into my layout. you'll see that if I don't put a page break between this and this, it might not work out the way that I wanted to. When I run it.
And export to PDF. It's a little bit of a non-exact science with this, where we recommend that you actually do the run test it experiment. So this did run to the start of the next page. Because that's just how it lined up, Versus it looks like this is on the same page, but no, because this got pushed to the top of the next page. So you just need to think in terms of that, the tables will do that expansion and that charts, it's going to be really tricky to layer rectangles behind them.
If you were having them be their natural through to have something behind showing through and said You want to have it where the chart itself has its background color set if you need that contrast because you chose say a light font. So these are going to be the design choices that you want to keep in mind that are customers are now doing when they're embracing this need for the print layout.
So that's just basically the ins and outs of just approaching this print layout is that you want to think about where you want your page breaks that you're going to get that vertical expansion from the tables just driven by content that you really want to keep in mind with that. And that you don't see the margins when you're looking in this view and you won't really see them until you preview and that the header And the footer area. I'll go between them. And add the content. And what is in your toolbox that's available, we'll change whether you're in on the main Working that's the fundamental aspect of it and then obviously, I can jump back to the Master. Now, the print layout will inherit.
Any changes you make cosmetically to the tables and charts. It should not inherit minor size adjustments, say I did here. Because I made my own specific sizing choices In the context of the print layout. So, that's something to Keep in mind is that because you resize it here, does it mean it's going to get the resize and here, just with The mobile layout it has its own kind of ratio widths and everything when you're laying things out, it's not going to be like, you micro adjusted the size in your master. And I'm gonna inherit on all the different. No, because they're all proportional and contextual versions of this chart. in terms of the layout in the sizing, So that's the other key difference to keep in mind with this.
## Are there any special sub features in the print layout? 
, This aspect to have Scale, fonts up or down. I believe you would want to maybe double check what we know in the documentation but I think this is uniformly across the board for the fonts. So, if you had a dashboard where you made, the fonts really, really big, because you were putting it up on a big screen or something a conference room, but you also wanted it to have a print layout option for running it, as a scheduled task and stuff. Maybe you actually scaled down the font you can and I'm pretty sure that applies throughout all components. We would have to double check that. It's not just for text components that it is actually applied to A tables and charts and so on. But I think the scale font is just uniformly applied to all components and then first page equals zero. So this start page index should be relative to the age number. Option that you can put into the headers or footers.
I guess if you wanted to clarify because you're looking to write this as a concept of, our reporting doesn't exist, When you're thinking of it from a style bi perspective, So you could also choose to explain that the top margin fundamentally what it is. It's from the top of the page to where the body of the report starts is one inch The header. Is going to be starting.
From the top edge of the paper, it's going to start 0.5 inches down. So therefore the header is the size of whatever is remaining of the top margin from that and that it would butt up against. The body. Of the page. Does visually that makes sense to you?
 Let's say your head or rgin is this? I should say the top margin when it says Header starts point From top of page. That means that the header starts here. And then fills out to wherever the top margin ends. So, it'll just line up. So, the header content. Ends up.Probably, you're gonna not fill that for me.
. Bill solid color. There we go. so, this whole thing this is the header marked, the top margin, and then the header starts this from page that dictates where it starts, and it will just continue. So if this happens to be like a two inch, one that you made, then it will start point five from it and then continue for a full inch and a half to give you room for a larger. Image and title. And so on, however, at the bottom of your page, It's going to be. Opposite. So, you're going to have the bottom of the page. if you said it was one inch and then my footer starts 0.75 from bottom of page.
Your footer will start. 0.75 from bottom of page and then continue downwards. So the body of your report will end up being From To here. So your body is going to bump up against your header section, but you're going to have a gap before your footer and your footer can go all the way to touching the bottom of the physical paper. So that's what it's describing.
Yeah, so this top Versus from edge, where does the er? Content start. And where does the footer content start? So, this whole boundary is That is the top Section where there's no writing for the body. And yet,…
The header is slotted in there and it starts from edge at this position and continues to where the body starts. With the bottom. that's the whole gap from where the body of the report content Will roll to next page, etc. And then your footer is from the bottom of the page to hear, however, big that is. So it's always with it. it can be up to the max of that bottom, like match to match, but it always has to be at least, less. It can't be more and it will go from here down. So you'll always have a little bit of a gap from where a table ends. If you were to put, a page number right here or page number in the middle or page number over on the side, you'll always have that gap. As long as you didn't match,
And that's something that we've always approached our borders this way with our reporting which we kept that consistent. Even though now we will be dashboard only. It's fundamentally built in there because this was the way we approached it, when we introduced the page breaks, even to, those that were maybe using style intelligence at the start.
When you're doing your print layout, you see it, it does impact. So you're like, PDF layout that you used to have. The default where it was just like the dashboard layout, you don't get that anymore. You get the print layout. So you're basically giving up one for the other So that's something to keep in mind. But the key thing is that if you're just like Why is my PDF, output look different than my dashboard. Hey open it up in Composer. Do you have a print layout here in your drop down The answer is Look someone made a print layout for Congratulations you have a really nice print layout isn't an awesome. and obviously, you can technically Go in to your options and in this layout Don't have print layout if you needed to
 Yeah, that's the core of this is that you're going to run into some nuances with the stretching and the shrinking of the components depending on how you approach it. But it's going to behave a little bit like the mobile layout in that you just are manually adding which things you want and leaving out, which things you don't want in your print layout. So, it becomes a selective. Paginated. Printable Export.
straightforward. But as I said there are some just Nuances. with depending on How you really want your report output to look? You might run into. you really actually need to approach your cross tab a little bit better because then it will work better in the print layout because you're not going to have full alternate table controls. When you're in a print layout, You get me in terms of you're going to get the expansion, but you're not going to get The options to resize your columns. You see, I don't get the option to resize my columns, etc. so, If you were relying on mouse over tooltip because text was getting cut off. which you could rely on in the dashboard in the browser you mouse over and you get the full content, if you don't have wrap text In the print layout, you're not going to get that. But it's gonna maintain. Your column with it's going to respect so you might find you make some adjustments, to your dashboard design. so that way it also doubles well on print layout And mostly it's going to be around those little.
